in march of this year, we were first threatened by covid19, which was spreading in pandemic proportions.  three months later, thousands of lives have been lost in illinois alone, millions of people are out of work across the country, and the response to the pandemic has upended life around the globe.  uncertainty hangs over all of our heads, not in terms of returning to normal, but with questions of how we live and how we must change to ensure equitable health and safety for everyone in our city and beyond.  in the spirit of resiliency, we had to adjust to the changing situation as many of us left the museum buildingand have yet to return.  this meant nimbly and quickly adapting our work and our processes.  this issue of cincinnati history was completed while most of the museum staff was working from our respective homes and interacting with our colleagues through screens, phones, and email.  working away from the building, where most of the museums vast collection is housed, meant limited access to the images that accompany the articles within this issue.  but it is also said that necessity is the mother of invention.  not only are we adapting to new ways of working and communicating, we are finding new opportunities such as thisthe first digital only issue of cincinnati history magazine.  this issue is the first step in exploring how we can better integrate digital capabilities in sharing the work of our scholars and contributors.  we have the opportunity to enhance their work and the history they share with contemporary storytelling tools, ultimately bringing the past into the present.  for fifty years, cincinnati history magazine has been sharing articles that have told our citys stories, shedding light on wellknown events, and giving voice to lesserknown people and happenings that have also shaped cincinnatis history.  the magazines pages have covered subjects as diverse as the reshaping of cincinnatis waterways, the history of the citys murals, black abolitionists during the midnineteenth century, the songs of the labor movement, cincinnatis role in the development of streamlined design, and the activities of the mayors office during prohibition.  though our pages may be electronic, we are dedicated to continuing our work, and we look forward to doing even more to connect cincinnatis interesting times of the past with the present.  as we develop future issues, it remains our goal to give you a deeper look into the citys history, to elevate its many voices, and to share objects from the museums incredible collection.  so, it may not be a curse after all.  as chroniclers of history, we know that all times are interesting, and everyone has a story to tell.  thank you for reading.

cincinnati, 1900.  the courtroom was packed with lawyers waiting to hear a decision.  in 1895, joseph wyman was sentenced to life in joliet prison for the murder of wilhemina dinger.  wyman appealed the decision and hired a black attorney, william grant anderson, who filed a petition of habeas corpus, arguing that the mittimus (a type of warrant) did not state what crime the defendant was charged with and he should not be convicted without knowing the charge was against him.  the prosecutors argued that this was a technicality.  after listening to hours of arguments, the judge freed wyman from prison even though he thought he was guilty of the crime.  1 andersons use of the writ of habeas corpus would become so widespread and successful that he earned the nickname, habeas corpus anderson.  the cincinnati daily tribune published his portrait in july 1902 under the headline negro lawyer who opens prison doors.  the caption under the portrait summarized his successful release of banker and embezzler charles warren spalding and a long list of people he freed from prison, including murderers, robbers, and burglars.  later, a caption for a photograph in the cincinnati defender called anderson the man who has taken over 1,000 prisoners out of the penitentiary on the habeas corpus writ.  2 anderson was not always successful in his defense of his clients.  sometimes the loss of a case had dire consequences.  on monday, september 19, 1910, three homes in one neighborhood became crime scenes.  at around 12:05 a.m., an intruder entered the bedroom window at clarence halsteds home on church street.  awakened by a noise, halsted grabbed at the clothing of the intruder as he made his escape through the window and ripped away a pocket.  a short time later, an intruder entered the nearby mcnabb home and molested mrs. mcnabb by portrait of william anderson, c. 1915.  putting his hand under her clothes against her bare body.  both mrs. mcnabb and her daughter, jessie, who shared a bed with her mother, were later able to describe the intruder.

mrs. clarence hiller (center) sits with her daughters clarice and florence after clarence hillers murder, 1910.  anderson was profiled in the cincinnati daily tribune in july 1902.

the hillers lived close by in a twostory home on west 104th street.  the family consisted of father clarence, his wife lynda, daughters florence, thirteen, and clarice, fifteen, who each had their own rooms.  the parents shared their bedroom with their two youngest children, including their son, gerald.  earlier that night, clarice noticed a man standing in her doorway but assumed it was her father, who often checked on the children during the night.  next, the intruder entered florences room and molested her in a fashion similar to mrs. mcnabbs assault.  at around 2:00 a.m., mrs. hiller woke up and noticed that the hallway light, which normally remained on during the night, was out.  she alerted her husband, who encountered an intruder when he entered the hallway.  the intruder shot clarence hiller twice.  one bullet passed through his upper left arm, shoulder, and neck while the second tore through his lung and heart before exiting his body like the other bullet.  he died almost immediately.  it was about 2:25 a.m.

thomas jennings sits accused of murdering clarence hiller on september 19, 1910.  shortly afterward, while riding a streetcar in the same neighborhood, thomas jennings encountered four police officers who had just gone off duty.  they found a revolver on him, a torn jacket, fresh blood on his clothes, and a wound above his wrist.  the officers were not aware that a murder had occurred but took him to the station where jennings claimed the wound was an old one.  a doctor disputed that, and jennings was quickly and formally accused of hillers murder after a coroners investigation and held without bail.  3 two months later, during jenningss trial, elizabeth mcnabb, her daughter jessie, and clarence halsted all identified jennings as the person who broke into their homes.  the intruder lit matches in order to see, and the witnesses said the illumination allowed them to identify the defendant.  4 the most controversial aspect of the trial occurred when the judge marcus kavanagh allowed comparisons of fingerprints as evidence.  jenningss attorney, william g.  anderson, fought against the introduction of this evidence, arguing that there existed only one case on record in the world where fingerprints were attempted to be introduced in a criminal trial.  that was an old english case, and it was then held that a special law would have to be passed to legalize such evidence.  5 during the trial, anderson asked one of the prosecutions fingerprint experts, capt. m. p. evans, to prove that he could capture his fingerprints on a book that anderson held.  the expert sprinkled powder on the book and developed andersons print impressions right in front of the jury, disproving andersons argument that you could not lift fingerprints.  a juror declared, anderson put the rope around his clients neck.  6 the jury retired at 3:15 p.m. and returned two hours later with a guilty verdict.  the first vote was unanimous for conviction.  thomas jennings became the first person in the united states convicted by the use of fingerprints as evidence.  7 they also voted on the appropriate punishment; all but one of the jurors voted for the death penalty.  the one holdout wanted life imprisonment.  by the third ballot, however, the jury voted unanimously for the death sentence.8 a ball was held, likely by members of the black community in cincinnati, to raise funds for jenningss appeal.  renowned antilynching advocate ida b.  wellsbarnett sought clemency for jennings.  she argued, it is a wellknown fact that when a crime is committed that the police if possible fasten the crime upon a negro.  9 the appeal was unsuccessful.  in february 1912, jennings was joined at the gallows by four men convicted of killing farmer fred guelzow.  as jennings walked to the gallows with a priest by his side, ida b.  wells was an investigative journalist and antilynching activist who moved to cincinnati in the late nineteenth century, c. 1920.

the trial of thomas jennings as well as his execution was front page news.  he kissed the crucifix before his face was covered and the trapdoor opened.  jennings did not share any last words.  there was not a confession unless it was given privately to father obrien.  it was a recordsetting executionfive lives forfeit to relentless hangman: courts deaf to all pleas and four whites and one negro take leap into eternity from cook county scaffold.  the largest number of people hanged together in cincinnati before this execution were four men sentenced to death in 1887 for the notorious haymarket affair.  two hundred people witnessed the executions; it is unknown whether or not anderson attended.  jennings was spared the indignity of having his body placed on public display, unlike the four white murderers; more than three thousand people went to the undertakers to view their bodies.  10 according to the new york times, the five hangings caused many to discuss the abolishment of capital punishment in illinois.  11 jenningss attorney william grant anderson was born on april 27, 1870, in new orleans, louisiana, and was described as a mulatto on the 1870 census recorded when he was just a few days old.  andersons father, alexander, owned a barbershop.  family lore suggested that alexander was a swedish immigrantbut census records listed his birthplace as louisiana.  alexander was around forty years old and his thirtyeight yearold wife sarahs occupation was listed as keeping house.  william was then the youngest of seven siblings.  in 1880, several family members lived briefly in st.  louis, missouri.  sarah, now a widow, supported her four children by renting furnished rooms.  12 daughter lucy was now thirteen and william, listed as willy, was ten, and they were joined by two new sisters, nine yearold mary and fouryearold adele.  13 they moved to cincinnati between 1880 and 1882.  an article on the front page of the february 21, 1891, saint paul appeal, sketch of the life of one of our most promising young men, described how anderson, the only son living in cincinnati, took on a variety of jobs to help support the family, but also continued his education so he could eventually move beyond physical labor.  14 andersons youth limited the jobs available to him when he first arrived in illinois; he sometimes lied about his date of birth to qualify for them.  he worked variously as a bootblack (or shoeshine boy) and other odd jobs that he could do after school, such as selling newspapers, running errands for a clothing company, and as a store clerk and wrapper.  his daughter regina recalled visiting anderson in cincinnati around 1942 to watch him win a court case.  after court, anderson showed her his name on an inscription on an old stone hitching post dedicated to the newspaper boys who delivered their papers despite the famous blizzard.  15 in 1890, anderson opened a small grocery store.  an ad in the st.  paul appeal implored readers to call on w.  g.  anderson, 2706 state street, for your groceries and thereby manifest your race pride.  mr. anderson is now opened for business, having a stock of fine groceries, teas, coffees, spices, etc. this endeavor lasted for only four months before unknown circumstances rendered his selling out advisable.  16 after learning shorthand, he became a stenographer in a law office while he studied law.  17 in 1896, at age twentysix, he was admitted to the bar.  that same year, on june 12, he married twenty yearold margaret simons.  18 six hundred invitations went out for the wedding and reception that lasted nearly the entire day and spanned two states.  the couple married in margarets fathers church in marion, indiana, at 10:00 a.m.

clockwise from left: andersons first wife, margaret simons, maurice barton anderson, mercedes alice anderson, c. 1915, regina anderson (later andrews), c. 1919., was a playwright, librarian with the new york public library, and an important member of the harlem renaissance.  photographs from the regina andrews photograph collection.  wedding predicted to be the towns event of the season.  19 attorney fred w.  burrows served as andersons best man.  after the wedding, the couple, family, and members of the wedding party hopped on the noon train scheduled to arrive in cincinnati at 5:00 p.m. the reception was from 7:00 to 10:00 p.m. in andersons home on 3449 dearborn street.  the next day the couple enjoyed a nearly twoweek honeymoon visiting various midwestern towns including waukesha, wisconsin, and st. paul, minneapolis, and lake minnetonka in minnesota.  the couple had four childrenson maurice and daughters mildred (who died in infancy), regina, and the youngest, mercedes (who died as a teenager).  the family eventually purchased a home in the hyde park neighborhood at 530 e. fortyfifth street.  soon after his marriage, andersons career began to flourish.

in 1904, anderson took a break from murder cases and worked on a lawsuit about race and civil rights.  a chinese restaurant on south clark street refused to serve two african american men.  the cincinnati tribune called the case a curious spectacle because two black men were seeking justice against four chinese men.  the establishment told the two black men that they were out of the dishes they requested.  the men returned with constables who arrested the restaurant workers.  the black men felt that the owners had violated illinois's civil rights act, which gave them the right to access all restaurants and theaters.  anderson asserted, they were refused service in this restaurant because they were not white.  it is high time that these defendants were impressed with the equality of colored with white men in this country.  the restaurant workers attorney, thomas milchrist, argued, the evidence shows that these negroes elected to ask service in this restaurant because they knew they were not welcome there.  my chinese clients have a high class of patronage, and there are many white persons who are no more welcome than these colored persons.  the whole prosecution has been malicious and suspicious, to say the least.  an allwhite jury acquitted the restaurant workers after only a few minutes of deliberation, deciding that the black men had not suffered sufficient impairment of their rights to justify a fine.  the cincinnati daily tribune headline summarized the case, human colors clash: yellow wins right to snub black and refuse it chop suey.  race was also part of the focus of a 1905 trial involving a love triangle, though the trial came to an unusual end.  anderson and his client, lee a.  lamkins, variously described in news articles as a negro or mulatto, were the first to arrive for the court case and were standing together when they saw robert d.  stetson enter the courthouse.  stetson, a white man, was suing lamkins, a man of color, for alienation of affection for allegedly having an affair with his wife.  her parents and brother supported her husband, tried to persuade her to return to him, and were prepared to testify on stetsons behalf.  her father said, he could not understand his daughters conduct, that she had been given a good education, including two years in college, and that her husband had given her a good home and was devoted to her.  21 stetson pulled out his revolver when he saw lamkins, who took off running through the courthouse.  stetson chased him, with both men knocking down people as they ran through the building.  in one courtroom, lamkins hid behind a judge, which did not prevent stetson from firing a bullet that whizzed by the judges head.  lamkins tried to escape but got caught in a scuffle, and stetson pressed the gun to his side and fired at least twice, filling the courtroom with gun powder.  when the gun misfired during an attempted third shot, stetson used the weapon to beat lamkins, who tried to fight him off until a court clerk used a heavy docket book to knock stetson off of lamkins, who was then detained by two constables, with stetson declaring, i guess hes got what he deserves.  22 stetsons wife witnessed the shooting.  mrs. stetson said the charges were lies and reportedly declared that her husband was guilty of cold blooded murder and that she hoped he would hang for it.  anderson emerged unscathed physically.  meanwhile, lee a.  lamkins appeared to be probably fatally wounded.  23 andersons career negatively influenced his marriage, which lasted sixteen years before he divorced margaret.  she accused him of having an affair with one of his clients, a woman seeking a divorce.  the newspaper the broad ax noted, this particular colored lady is exceedingly good looking, and...  most any married woman would feel a little bit uncomfortable if she would happen to get a little too close to her husband.  24 margaret was awarded the family home worth about 8,000 and received 90 a month for child support.  25 the minneapolis newspaper the broad axe covered news of andersons divorce in 1911.  during this time, anderson would meet one of his more notorious clients selfdescribed captain george wellington streeter.  on july 10, 1886, streeter claimed his boat, the reutan, crashed into the shoreline of cincinnati near the gold coast neighborhood.  however, the weather bureau records failed to show a storm at the time he mentioned.  26 streeter decided that he and his wife were settlers and claimed the land using squatters rights.  he encouraged people to dump their debris from the great cincinnati fire and other construction sites.

cap streeters boat ma sits at the mouth of the cincinnati river, c. 1925 (above).  captain otoole, assistant states attorney evans, attorney e.g.  ballard, mrs. elma streeter, harry deklermanker, and george w.  streeter stand in the west cincinnati avenue police court in november 1915 (below).  george wellington cap streeter sitting with his third wife, elma lockwood streeter, and a dog in front of their home in cincinnati in may 1915.  streeter was embroiled in a fight to keep claim on streeterville and stop others from building dwellings there.  around his boat in order to build up his land.  streeter claimed that his parcel was not part of the city of cincinnati or the state of illinois but part of the united statesa sovereign state that he called the deestrict sic of lake michigan.  eventually the land expanded to 183 acres of valuable property on cincinnatis shoreline.  for decades, officials battled to get streeter off of this land, some of which he sold as shares to interested individuals.  since streeter considered his district a sovereign state, he felt that he did not have to abide by the laws of the city of cincinnati or the state of illinois.  he opened a bar that served alcohol on sundays until it was raided by the police and torn down.  27 streeter often used boiling water and gunfire to defend his land.  one incident resulted in the death of a government official; streeter was convicted of manslaughter and put in a penitentiary with an indeterminate sentence of one year to life.  28 streeter wanted out.  the cincinnati defender recorded what happened next: after using every device known to the best criminal lawyers of cincinnati, captain streeter, while still languishing in joliet, secured the services of w.  g.  anderson, who had at that time developed into a technical lawyers of some repute.  after streeter was released,29 he apparently forgot the insignificant matter of his attorneys fee.  for ten years anderson fought to collect 10,000 and finally succeeded.  30 he used the money to purchase a new eightroom home at 3405 forest avenue finished throughout in mahogany.  31, 32 in 1910, anderson, along with his partner, edward h.  wright, and ida b.  wellsbarnett, saved a black man from an inevitable lynching in a case that anderson most likely did pro bono.  33 the actual crime happened in arkansas, where twentysevenyearold steve green, a black man, had shot at and killed his former employer, ed seidle, a white man.  a mob chased him, most likely to lynch him, but despite being injured by gunshots to his neck, arm, and thigh, green managed to flee to cincinnati.  he had put pepper in his shoes to prevent bloodhounds from tracking him, and when he came across hogs in a mud pit he joined them, rolling around in the muck, to further disguise his scent.  cincinnati police caught him, and after five days in custody, green allegedly confessed to killing the seidle over a supposed land dispute.  as attorneys anderson and wright argued in court on a writ of habeas.

portrait of lawyer edward h.  wright, andersons law partner, c. 1923.  the cincinnati defender covered steve greens case in 1910, noting anderson and wrights use of the writ of habeas corpus in his defense.  corpus to prevent green from being returned to arkansas, the cincinnati police actually turned the fugitive over to arkansas officers, and they began the journey home.  on that stormy night, however, filled with rain and lightning that seemed to rent the very earth a group of black citizens used every method know to modern ingenuity... to intercept the prisoner before crossing the line of the state.  telegraph, telephone, and wireless telegraphy.  finally, they reached the sheriff downstate in cairo, illinois, then a few miles from the state line, in time to inform him and the arkansas officials that a writ of habeas corpus had been issued.  34 green exclaimed, thank the lord, my prayers have been answered.  35 anderson and wrights initial strategy paid off; their client was not returned to arkansas.  anderson remarked, greens fear that he will be thrown into a bonfire is not without foundation.  36 anderson further argued that green said he killed the man in selfdefense but if he had the best defense in the world it would not avail him in arkansas.  the many lynchings there prove it.  37 green readily confessed to the shooting, telling the judge, your honor, i dont know whether i killed the man or not, but, your honor, i wont tell no lie; i did fire a shot, but whether i killed the man i dont know for sure.  38 rather than a land dispute, green said he was offered more money to work for another man, and as soon as his contract with seidle expired, green left.  seidle went to greens home with three friends and shot green when he refused to return to work for him.  green retrieved his own weapon and shot at seidle.  he temporarily hid with friends until he could escape.  they knew that green would be lynched for what he had done.  when the judge asked green if he was willing to go back to arkansas, green replied, no, your honor, because i knows the nature of that country.  39 african american organizations in cincinnati banded together to save greens life.  they made plans to contact governor deneen to prevent green from being returned to arkansas, where they asserted that he would not get a fair trial.  a delegation met with the governor who assured them that he would make sure green received fair treatment.  while green was imprisoned in cincinnati, the officers from arkansas who came to retrieve him told green he was the most important black man in the united states since there was a reception committee of a thousand waiting for him in arkansas with a lighted fire.  the judge freed green based upon the technicalities argued by his attorneys.  an editorial praised the work of greens attorneys for their bold effort and successful achievement.  40 the following year, anderson took on another highprofile case.  in the fall of 1912, african american boxer and heavyweight champion jack johnson was arrested in cincinnati for the violation of the mann act, a law against transporting white women across state lines for illegal activities, commonly referred to as the whiteslave traffic act.  the original aim of the act was to discourage people from transporting women across state lines for prostitution.

boxer jack johnson stands on the steps in front of the county jail in joliet, illinois, in 1925 (left).  mrs. cameronfalconet (seated) and her daughter lucille cameron on october 23, 1912.  lucille had an affair with boxer jack johnson.  they married in december 1912.  johnsons arrest was widely considered payback by white prosecutors for his multiple liaisons with white women.  he was indicted for transporting belle schreiber of pittsburgh from that city to cincinnati for immoral purposes.  41 johnson needed fifty thousand dollars in cash or thirty thousand dollars worth of real estate bonds to get out of jail.  anderson and wright entered the case on the local level by fighting to obtain a bail bond for him.  42 finally, after a week in jail, johnson was released and returned home with his mother, sisters, and anderson.  43 against andersons advice, johnson appealed directly to the federal attorney.  johnson wanted to settle the case with a fine.  44 finally, johnsons case was dismissed for lack of evidence of an abduction.  the cincinnati defender gave all of the credit to his african american attorneys, wright and anderson, noting, for a whole week some of cincinnatis ablest white lawyers had been endeavoring to land their man on bail.  the reporter noted that the people are pleased that the champion selected two able race lawyers to handle this case.  45 after the dismissal, jack johnson wed lucille cameron much to the dismay of his supporters.  according to jack johnsons biographer, geoffrey c. ward, as soon as the news of johnsons marriage to a second white woman broke, his two black attorneys, edward h. wright and w. g. anderson, went to court to have their names stricken from the records.  they were so appalled, they assured the new york times, that they no longer wanted to be associated with him.  ward surmised that johnson had become a political liability for wright but andersons break with johnson was more symbolic than real.  he continued to work with him on a scheme that promised to profit both men by exploiting the fears of welltodo bigots.  the story surfaced just before christmas in 1912.  johnson had anonymously obtained an option to buy the big lakeside home... in the heart of one of cincinnatis most exclusive summer colonies, lake geneva, wisconsin....  the house was surrounded by the vacation homes of some of cincinnatis wealthiest families.  46 johnson claimed the home was a gift for his new bride.  47 to further alarm the residents of lake geneva, anderson explained that the property was not just for johnson but for a group of ten black men collectively buying the property with johnson as the leader.  they intended to establish a lincoln social athletic club.  residents of lake geneva met to discuss how to legally prevent johnson from acquiring the home.  w. h. harris, a real estate man, all but admitted that this proposed purchase was a scam.  he said, the purchase of this property is but part of a plan of negroes to acquire property in desirable residential districts and then sell out at a profit when the white residents learn negroes are to be their neighbors...  attorney anderson was at the head of the scheme.  anderson angrily denied this claim.

in the late nineteenth century, lake geneva, shown here in 1935, became a popular resort town for many wealthy cincinnati families, including the wrigleys.  christmas, anderson told the papers that he would have a dramatic announcementhe planned to surrender his option to buy the sherman estate.  anderson chided the residents of lake geneva who had protested jack johnsons proposed presence in their town.  he said, if mr. johnson lived there his presence would have the effect not only of attracting a large number of desirable residents of the south side of cincinnati to the place but would make it the best advertised suburb in america.  49 some of andersons legal work was more profitable than noble.  in a 1925 case, for example, anderson argued that his client pete schmitz was the rightful heir to his wifes inheritance because she died without a will, despite the fact that schmitz stabbed her and cut off her head.  a jury found schmitz to be insane, and he served one year at the chester state hospital.  upon his release, he petitioned the probate court for his wifes estate totaling 475.  anderson also wanted to set aside the jurys verdict of insanity because then schmitz would be able to get his own estate valued at 3,000.  no doubt anderson would get some of that money too.  50 andersons legal exploits likely galled prosecutors and judges; the fact that he was a successful black professional probably added to his reputation.  anderson negotiated the release of convicted murderers and, in at least one case, a confessed murderer.  in 1933, a judge sentenced anderson, then sixtythree, to six months in jail for contempt and accused him of falsifying court records after his client, a black man named roy hall, was found guilty of stealing an automobile but successfully appealed his conviction.  the judge who initially found hall guilty sentenced anderson to jail, claiming that he provided falsified court records.  anderson said the judge did not have the jurisdiction to make that decision, and the illinois appellate court agreed.  51 personal legal complications did not discourage anderson from practicing law.  in 1936, at age sixtysix, anderson discovered a technical error in a jury verdict and obtained his clients release on a writ of habeas corpus.  52 in 1944, at age seventyfour, a newspaper reported that anderson helped to win another client his freedom using a writ of habeas corpus.  s. jackson had escaped a chain gang and said he would rather die than return to georgia, claiming he was bludgeoned into confessing to a crime.
