on 2 august 1945, in ba dinh square, president ho chi minh solemnly read the declaration of independence, giving birth to the democratic republic of viet nam.  the newly established democratic republican government had to cope with a situation of endless complications.  in the south, the french army, hiding behind the british military, landed in saigoncholon, continuing their aggressive plots against our nation.  in the north, nearly 200,000 of chiang kaishek's military came, in the name of the allied forces, to disarm the fascist japanese, and escorted gangs of lackies plotting to overthrow the authority organized by the viet minh viet nam independence league.  reactionary gangs in the nation took advantage of the people's rising to act to counter and destroy the resistance.  the japanesefrench imperialist gangs provoked famine and ran wild.  faced by the devious plots of enemies both foreign and domestic, together with difficulties in every respect in our homeland after the revolution had just succeeded, the fate of our nation at that moment faced a very dangerous situation, for "money and necessities were hanging on a hair." in order to confront the enemy's aggressive plots against our nation in order to protect the incipient authority of the people the standing committee of the central party and president ho chi minh proposed some urgent tasks to strengthen authority, counter the french colonialists' aggression, abolish crime, raise the standard of living of the people, and especially to show concern for supplying concrete guidance in building revolutionary armed forces.  on 7 september 1945, president ho chi minh entrusted to commander hoang van thai responsibility for establishing the general staff organization. (commander vo nguyen giap was also present at the occasion).  when assigning the task, uncle said: "our people have just won their independence, their freedom all of our nation is starting to build an army of resistance and selfdefense to safeguard our independence, our freedom.  pursuant to collective instructions, the staff bo tham muu is established to help central exercise command of the army in our whole nation.  "as the secret organization of the collective as the nerve center of the army the st is responsible for military strength, for forging weaponry, for knowing the enemy,in order to defeat every enemy.

"at this time we have no experience do not yet understand staff work have many difficulties.  but we have to strive to overcome this, studying even as we work.  with determination, many difficulties can be worked through.  somehow we must also build a staff branch of our army that is solid and powerful, worthy of the tradition of giving one's mind to forwarding and preserving the nation of the vietnamese peoples."' on 8 september 1945, commander hoang van thai sponsored the first meeting of comrades to introduce the organizations of the general staff, in order to determine and allocate responsibilities.  on 9 september 1945, the military communications liaison bureau of the general staff was officially established, under commander hoang dao thuy.  from a week before, according to instructions from the central party standing committee and uncle ho, minister of internal affairs in the provisional revolutionary government, and concurrently commanderinchief revolutionary armed forces, had a personal exchange with commander hoang dao thuy and handed to him responsibility for preparing to build a military communications liaison system.  this was a responsibility that had to be carried out at once, with no delay, in order to help central, the government, and the high command come to grips with the situation and issue timely instructions to the combat sectors chi khu and units throughout the nation.  immediately upon being established, the communications liaison bureau started to develop the organization of a network mcng lu'6'il of communications liaison, and the first task was the early creation of a radio liaison network especially for the army.  with the central party concerned with assignment of people and getting equipment, a few of the fellows took it upon themselves to search out old radio stations in french depots, and, after just a short time, an official military radio liaison net was inaugurated, comprising the high command and general staff in hanoi with the combat sectors of dong trieu, viet bac, northern viet nam, or tonkin, and hoa binhlninh binhl thanh hoa; the revolutionary military affairs committee of trung bo central viet nam, or annam; and the military affairs committees of thuathienhue and da nang.  besides the military liaison network, liaison between the central radio offices (hanoi) and those of trung bo and nam bo southern viet nam, or cochinchina was maintained and shaped, making a liaison network of military postal and radio service throughout the nation.  in the first days of the revolutionary regime, the leadership and command comrades, the organizations sending messages and those receiving messages, and the communications organizations equally felt uncomfortable sending messages over the military radio or viathe post offices in plain text, unenciphered.  thus an urgent requirement was to research methods of using cryptography so as to ensure communication security.  commander hoang van thai personally reviewed and approved the plan to establish the cryptographic section and strongly recommended that commander hoang dao thuy select good, trustworthy, literate people for the task of cryptography.  on 12 september 1945, the military cryptographic section, the first cryptographic organization of the army, was established, tasked with research, production, and use of cryptographic systems to ensure the secrecy of leadership and command communication of the various echelons of the army going viathe various means of communication (principally by radio).  this was also the first cryptographic organization of our nation.  the twelfth of september has since been taken as the birthday of the army cryptographic branch.  at the beginning, the cryptographic section lay in the bureau of communication liaison.  the working area was a room behind that of commander bureau chief hoang dao thuy in building no. 16 riquer street, 2 adjacent to the general stdorganizations.  in accordance with a proposal by commander hoang dao thuy, commander vo nguyen giap appointed commander ta quang de, 9 who was working in the ministry of internal affairs, to transfer to the general staff and assume charge of the cryptographic mission.  having received the responsibility and concrete recommendations of commander hoang van thai, and after determining the particulars and mission components, commander ta quang de circumspectly proceeded to select people who could be introduced to the work of cryptography.  the "criterion" for selection was based on estimation of a "good, trustworthy person," and an additional condition was "readytogo," no family ties, committed to an assignment requiring total reliability.  a number of the fellows who were introduced by responsible people to cryptographic work prior to the organization were intellectuals and petty officials, and at the same time boy scouts from troops such as dinh loan, thuyen, hoang quy quan; also young miss bui thi loan, a liberation army soldier returned from the combat sector.  after a few days, nguyen tu khang, bach tuong, sam, dich, then tran mi thach in turn were introduced to the work.  after working together a few weeks, the fellows did some brainstorming about many aspects of this new assignment.  prior to this time, the colonialist french gang had not ever instructed vietnamese people, or entrusted them, in our own cryptographic organizations, so there was no one who thoroughly understood the business.  therefore, the ideas shared by these fellows, together with revolutionary enthusiasm, built up trust on the part of the leadership comrades.  afterwards, in a situation in which people to perform cryptography were lacking in various places and in accordance with arrangements by commander hoang van thai, dich went to combat sector 4, thach went up to thainguyenbac can, and sam, khang, and tuong were placed on a long line from phuc yen up to phu tho, locales that needed to quickly put down the activities of the vietnamese nationalist party and "viet cach" vietnam revolutionary cliques.  near the end of the year, the cryptographic section received two more people: commander nguyen hai hac, graduate of the higher agricultural school, home in hanoi, and commander tung anh5 from quang ngai, who came at the invitation of the military organization there.  asofthispoint, people working in the cryptographic section were temporaries.  some arriving before, some later, these were the comrades present in the early stage of the formation of the army cryptographic branch.  a small, closeknit and affectionate family, united to help each other, with a clear sense of responsibility and personal honor to respond to the requirements of the revolution and the army, these comrades shouldered atough, essential job, doing the spade work for atechnical branch of the pavn.  initial feelings of inadequacy passed quickly.  with respect to cryptography, it could be said that the resources of the comrades at this stage were simply revolutionary zeal and enthusiasm, together with a book, the basic principles of cryptography in french, which had come apart, and some two or three boy scout riddle games.  this was the level of knowledge at this stage.  a variation in the account of the origins of vietnamese cryptography is contained in volume 1, 1718,of the history of the communications liaison troops (draft) (hanoi: communications liaison hq, 1985): "in the fall of 1945 when they sent out an unenciphered official message, all of the communications liaison bureau saw it and were uncomfortable.  the place that received it also asked why it wasn't encrypted.  the chief of the communications liaison bureau proposed to hq the establishment of a cryptographic section (not yet called 'essential matters'), to be placed in the communications liaison bureau.  imagine that! cryptography, placed in the communications liaison bureau! but that is the truth.  we need to say more about this fresh new organization: beforehand,throughout all of indochina, the gang of french colonialist rulers would not train and entrust to the vietnamese employment in their cryptographic organizations.  that's understandable.  as a result, when we seized power, the two radio liaison centers, north and south, had to generate two reference works for enciphering and deciphering that differed from each other.  in hanoi, when the first messages were sent to saigon, they requested the recipients to use passages in the classic, kieu, by nguyen dzu as an enciphering deciphering reference work.  in saigon, they proposed that hanoiuse mendeleyev's periodic table in order to solve the key and encipher and decipher the messages sent from then on.  thus, i t was imperative to have a or, "one" cryptographic organization.  not knowing where else to put it, it was properly placed in the communications liaison bureau. "on 12 september 1945, the cryptographic section was established, subordinate to the communications liaison bureau." commander ta quang de (ta quang dam) and commander dinh loan thuyen (hoang thanh)were invited by the general staff to undertake the making of cryptosystems.  before the august revolution, in the scientific games and entertainments of the students and intellectuals in hanoi, there were many young peopleamong them commanders de and thuyen who regularly played number and letter games according to set rules, and transformed the numbers and letters to make words and sentences.  now, confronted by the requirements of the revolution of the army the comrades readily accepted and got involved with a deep attitude of responsibility.  one week later, a cryptographic paper with adequate key was accepted by the general staff, and the communications liaison bureau was instructed to quickly develop cryptographic personnel for each radio station." ibid., 20: "...the troop strength of the bureau at this time (including the bureau chief) was only eight people.

the comrades divided among themselves going to meet comrades who had experience in covert activities inside and outside our country, seeking to learn from their experience; searching for a few types of cipher keys, easy to remember, easy to use; a few methods of writing secret letters; all sorts of text books in the vietnamese language that could be consulted in research.  the comrades regularly said to one another, "now we've really got to get back to our mother tongue!" not long before this, everytime one spoke up in class it had to be in the language of the french "mother country," and now, how eagerly they were going to kin the vietnamese tongue! there were young men and women at this time, under the age of twenty, coming to grasp the fact that vietnamese had many alphabets and knowing which, encountered many, especially in literature.  the cryptographic concept of "frequency" emerged through the practice of enciphering and deciphering.  at the suggestion and urging of commander hoang dao thuy, after about a week, commander ta quang de researched a system to use to write and read secret lettem8 per instructions from commander hoang van thai, this cryptographic system was given to a command comrade on the vinh yen front to use for liaison.  somedays later, commander hoang van thai gave commander dea secret letter to encipher for sending to the vinh yen front.  the content was a short section, but written out to produce a full page.  when signing the message form, the comrade chief of the general staffobserved, "first, this way you have to write a lot, use up a lot of time, a lot of paper; second, it's rather difficult to ensure a fit between what's valid and what's false, thus the end is revealed; and, third, it's not handy for message transmission." from these observations and exchanges with the fellows in the cryptographic section, commander de came up with a different method: a method of enciphering each alphabetical letter simple in use, a neat, compact chart.  in using these systems for monoalphabetic doc bieul substitution and transposition, by close observation of a number of cryptograms, the comrades subjected them to detailed scrutiny and saw a number of points arise: concerning monoalphabetic substitution: the repetition of the plaincipher values followed a basic form.  some consonants and vowels in the vietnamese language, represented by two letters, caused the frequency to rise very clearly.  enciphering by transposition, using a literal key or a digital key: if enciphering by simple letter transposition, then the number of letters of the enciphered message would be equal to the number of letters of the plaintext message.  these conditions resulted in cryptography that would not ensure tight secrecy, easily exposed to the eye of an enemy with much experience in cryptanalysis.  each individual arrived at the conclusion that the systems being used would not yet meet the requirement to ensuresecrecy, their degree of security was at a rather low level we had to quickly research different systems to replace them.  based on experience with monoalphabetic substitution cipher, commander ta quang de discussed with the people in the section finding a way to change the system and change the key.  above all else, to produce some way that the appearance of the cryptogram was not dependent upon the appearance of the plaintext message when our people looked at the cipher text they only saw it in its entirety, whereas clusters of letters differed from others in frequency and quantity.  then, in enciphering, to carry out a key change, a chart or direction change, even right in a message.  the concrete method would have to have a composite chart, composed of many contrasting systems, each system with an individual key.  after a period of searching and exchanging views within the section, commander de came up with a new type of system.  the first columnar chart system had succeeded, with commanders hoang van thai and hoang dao thuy agreeing to introduce its use to replace the systems that had been used for so long.  once the cryptographic systems had been typed up, commander hoang van thai sent a message to the sector chiefs to select dependable people to come to hq to receive the system and listen to directions for use.  a few days later, van tien dzung came from chine bringing along a cryptographic cadre, then le van suu from intersector 4, vu hien from haiphong, le quang hoa, hoang minh thao, et al., and the other units in turn selected cryptographers from their units to receive the system.  according to the principles of this system, each cryptogram had to be changed into a fixed number of columns.  each column had its own key and in order to be certain of ensuring secrecy, each key was fixed for many cryptographic values k i hieu mat.  at first, many comrades were a bit perplexed, suggesting that use of simple transposition would also ensure secrecy.  the comrades in the section had to stand their ground in explaining, and the others finally became truly unanimous.  after a period of use, enciphering and deciphering many times, the work became routine.  the comrades in the research team continued to realize an additional step, regulating the movement of the cipher strips, according to day, etc.  one might say, from forms of "leave out the false, what's left is valid" in order to read secret letters (not yet forms that could properly be called cryptosystems) and monoalphabetic substitution and transposition by pattern, we quickly moved to chart systems using irregularly arranged values with many columns and many keys.  these chart systems, given the educational and technical conditions of our society, generally speaking, and our army, specifically, at that time, seemed relatively suitable and achieved a notable level of meeting the requirement to serve guidance and command.  the work came fast and furious, the activity of the vietnamese nationalist party in the provinces of phu tho and old vinh phuc being reported continuously by message.  then the nam bo resistance, the french colonialists hiding behind the british military, swarming into indochina and attacking and occupying many cities.  the endless struggles of great fortitude of our southern compatriots took place daily.  so as to quickly grasp the situation and issue guidance for coping with the enemy and foreign aggressors, the cryptographic section, along with the communications liaison organizations, worked day and night.  from the end of september, through octobernovember 1945, the volume of secret messages increased very rapidly.  the matter of telegraphic language frequency posed a need for research into a method of scientific calculation. (initially, this matter had to be done by guessing, for there was atimesensitive need to satisfy the most pressing, urgent requirement for the service of command.) the clear part of the cryptographic system form received concentrated research in construction.  combining experience and research and the use of a columnar system that followed the principle of monoalphabetic substitution with a digital key, with personally searching out and consulting foreign documents in order to apply international principles suitable to the special aspects of vietnamese telegraphic spelling, commander dinh loan thuyen and colleagues produced a vietnamese chart.  the system was constructed according to the method of polyalphabetic substitution encipherment of word components.  after completion of the system, it was quickly put into use.  implementing a directive from the chief of the general staff, the cryptographic section designated people to convey the system to a number of places lacking the means to receive it.  on the first lunar new year's day after the august revolution, commander thuyen was ordered in turn to convey the system and directions for use of the 676cell chart to the units from phu ly to binh dinh.  visavis nam bo, that theater of war received concentrated assistance from the whole country: from october 1945, the cryptographic section quickly sent cipher models, carried by commander hoang quoc viet, to be handed over to the sector xd'l committee, when the comrade, on behalf of the standing committeeof the central party, went down and participated in the opening at the sector committee conference.  a consciousness of the need for constantly changing keys, changing cipher strips, replacing systems dawned earlyon among the comrades engaged in cryptography.  one day, around the end of 1945, the second bureau military intelligence1 sent over to the cryptographic section a number of enemy cryptograms.  although knowing nothing about cryptanalysis, the fellows nevertheless took a stab at it.  the unexpected result was that the comrades decrypted athird of the cipher messages from a french army unit stationed in upper laos exchanging operational matters among themselves by means of a simple substitution system.  this resulted in the second bureau comrades forming a high opinion of the expertise of the cryptographers.  as for us, this small accomplishment in cryptanalysis had the effect of helping our people make up systems, even as it helped them in encrypting messages themselves.  in january 1946, in accordance with instructions from central, the general staff organizations were realigned.  the cryptographic organization was split off from the communications liaison bureau.  for the political, routine, and administrative aspects, it would be directly subordinate to the general staff secretariat; for speciality professional knowledge that was the essence of its task, directly subordinate to the comrade chief of the general staff.  the main ofice of the bureau was moved to no. 26 hang bai (a sign in front of the door of the office said "bureau of secret messages 9'the sectors khu, the cryptographic organization was called "department ty of secret messages," or "department of cryptography." in sector 1, the department of secret messages was organized directly subordinate to the regional command post secretariat, while in the regiments cryptographic teams were directly subordinate to the regimental command section.  in sectors 4 and 5, the cryptographic organizations were called department of cryptography, directly subordinate to the secretariat or stafforganizations, with cryptographic teams in the regiments.  in march 1946, commander ta quang de became a liaison control officer between the vietnamese and french sides.g commander hoang van dong became chief of the cryptographic bureau.  research into cryptographic technique was undertaken by commanders dinh loan thuyen and hoang v an dong.  at this time, the 676 cell code chart was improved, fixed strips replaced by movable strips, raising the level of cryptographic security.  the content of the chart was added to by compound words, thus shortening cipher messages.  the system received use at once and was brought into play with effect in ensuring communication security between the high command of the vietnamese relief troops in hanoi, with eleven units, hai dzuong, thai binh, phu ly, and nam dinh.  at the beginning of 1946, commander thuyen received the task of preparing a system to ensure cryptographic liaison between our government's delegation at the da lat preparatory conference and the general st.  realizing the degree of importance of the matter in our foreign relations struggle with the french, to ensure the secrecy of policy instruction laid down to our delegation by the party and government, commander thuyen concentrated all of his efforts into making a system.  the good things of the chart form were incorporated into a chart system made solely to serve the da lat conference.  the leadership comrades also knew that, at this conference, the french side had brought along a guy who was a specialist in cryptanalysis, with equipment to search out our secret information.  having received the first two messages sent back from the da lat conference, commander thuyen personally broke them out and was flabbergasted: the person enciphering the messages had not conformed closely to the regulations concerning the technique that had been conveyed the information we were sending could easily be uncovered by the enemy.  the cryptographic bureau at once suggested to commander hoang van thai suspending the use of this type of system.  during the course of working for the previous half year, commanders dam, thuyen, and dong were tormented with mixed feelings, principally over whether the cryptography they were using was really tightly ensuring military secrecy or not.  after reading some documents that had been received, the comrades knew that those people were still enciphering and deciphering by machine, and especially that they were still using equipment that made it very easy to discover the system and key.  thus they had to be even stricter with themselves, although believing firmly in the sense of loyal service by the young men and women performing cryptography, as far as their country was concerned, the general standard was still low and capacity for carelessness no small matter.  the comrades discussed with the young men and women in the section a cryptanalytic test of an enciphered message, setting aside knowledge of system and key, to see if it could be made out.  but, although they worked out the system and key, once, when they did not have system and key at hand, no one could make out anything at all.  thus day by day and week by week, continuing this sort of thing, they listened intently and watched for signs of any leaks in secrecy, and they felt reassured.
