dc makes its foray into the world of international art heavies this april 27 to 30 when the first annual modern and contemporary art fair arrives at dcs convention center, hall e. art dc features 80 galleries from europe, asia and the americas showcasing modern and contemporary art in all disciplines including, painting, photography, sculpture, works on paper, and video with the hope of establishing artdc as one of the not to be missed annual fairs.  dc is represented by conner contemporary, andrea pollans curators office, robert brown gallery, parish gallery, and art dealer jane haslem.  artdc slice is a special projects areas where visitors can discover todays hottest trends by emerging artists, including another look: new art from shanghai, a curated exhibition of contemporary artists from shanghai working in a variety of media.  a unique new media installation area, space provides a largescale video lounge  bar featuring video and internet art projects by regional artists selected from a local juried competition organized by artdc and flashpoint.  many of the regions nonprofit spaces and institutions will be present in the fair as well, some with curated exhibitions.  a benefit will take place on the evening of thursday april 26 ticket prices are 100 (too rich for my blood!) during the first two hours of the evening from 5:30 to 7:30 when drinks and hors doeuvres will be served, and 30 from 7:30 to 9:30 with a cash bar.  tickets may be ordered by calling 3125878124 or by email: jrabionartfair.com.  artdc has partnered with the cultural alliance of greater washington as the fairs preview night beneficiary.  in addition, artdc proudly presents a series of panel discussions titled artalks, featuring many local museum directors, curators, scholars and artists speaking on a variety of timely topics.  many of the citys museums and arts institutions will collabo rate with artdc as part of an enriching education program.  this program will include seminars, special tours and offsite activities throughout the fourday fair.  for a detailed schedule of times and dates for these activities are posted on the artdc website: www.dcartfair.com.  the washington convention center is located at 801 mount vernon place, nw.  show hours are friday through sun day, april 27 to 29 from 11 a.m.  until 7 p.m.  and on monday, april 30, from 11 a.m.  until 5 p.m.  admission is free friday.  all other days general admission is 12, 9 for groups of 10 or more and 6 for seniors and students.  for additional information and regular updates, visit their website at www.dcartfair.com.

modernism: designing a new world, 1914 to 1939 is the new exhibit at the corcoran gallery of art that opened march 17th and runs through july 29th.  this ambitious show makes its only american stop here in washington, after runs at the victoria and albert museums in london and marta herford in germany.  organizing a single show about modernism  an umbrella term that encompasses a multitude of movements and concerns  is about as easy as herding cats.  all the more surprising, then, that the corcoran has put together an enlightening, brilliant exhibit that informs while it entertains.  one of modernisms best qualities is its dizzying variety of media.  this comprehensive collection includes everything from cubist paintings to a full size reproduction of a bauhaus kitchen.  the variety is one factor among many that makes the exhibit imminently accessible: this is a show for the novice and the fan alike.  the information that accompanies the works of art is carefully chosen to inform the reader of general ideas while simultaneously high lighting factoids that revisit familiar works of art with their original immediacy.  the primary color grids of mondrian, for instance, have been featured on every thing from cocktail dresses to spongebob cartoons, but few visitors probably know that piet mondrian regarded his deceptively simple constructions as visual translations of the principles of theosophy, a form of philosophical mysticism popular at the time.  the works are presented as interrelated, adding to the comprehensive impression the show creates.  the pieces are organized in a manner that captures the conflicting multiplicity of modernist visions.  conflicting movements and ideologies are positioned close to each other, mimicking powerful dynamism that has made modernist art so tumul tuous and exciting.  the cubist room gives way to the futurist room, who werent all too fond of the cubists.  the space dedicated to the worldly, techno cratic, futurists is succeeded by spiritual utopia; a section that investigates the metaphysical importance many expressionists invested in their work.  the otherworldly geometry of spiritual utopianism is next door to the urbaninspired straight lines and dynamic planes of constructivism.  the hard lines and clean angles of the de stijl room are mere steps away from the graceful, curvilinear world of purism.  theres even a serpentine wall in the purist space that mimics le corbusier while directing the viewers course through the gallery.  at times, this design ventures into kitsch, as with the sheet metal paneling in the machine gallery that addresses the modernist fascination with fordism and assembly line production.  kitschy, perhaps, but still striking, and a little provocative.  rooms are dedicated to specific movements, like the famous bauhaus school, events, like the weissen hof housing exhibition, and also to general themes, like the modernist fascination with nature, or the role of theater and performance art.  an american salon houses several beautiful pieces by dove, bluemner, maurer and the like, but feels empty compared with the shows other sections.  the only medium displayed in the american salon is painting, and one feels the organizers missed an opportunity in not displaying significant american utopian works such as brook farm or, more relevantly, b.f.  skinners frightening walden two.  there are already numerous examples of print media in the show that reinforce the relevance and importance of modernism, including original editions of dystopian masterpieces like george orwells 1984 and aldous huxleys brave new world.  the inclusion of walden two would be discon certing, though, and a lone criticism of an otherwise flawless exhibit is the corcorans seeming reticence to address that disconcerting, darker face of modernism.  if the shows enthusiasm and neutral attitude towards politics makes it accessible and educational, the downside is that there are no downsides.  the museums explanation of the futurist movement, for instance, says marinetti and his circle wanted to abandon past traditions.  abandon hardly captures the fury of f.t.  marinettis 1908 foundation and manifesto of futurism:we will destroy museums, libraries, and fight against moralism, feminism, and all utilitarian cowardice.  true, marinetti and his colleagues had a keen appreciation of sensation and showmanship, but he proved that statements integrity when he took a prominent post in benito mussolinis fascist government.  in the constructiv ist room, the corcorans explanation declares, in 1917, the russian revolution had established the first workercontrolled state in modern europe.  one wonders if any workers felt that way when confronted by lenins secret police thugs.  especially enlightening is the copy on the walls in the national modernisms room, a space that addresses the official uses of modernist motifs by governments at the time.  throughout the 1920s, it reads, modernism had been associated with progressive causes and left wing politics.  however, its visual language proved surprisingly adaptable and in the 1930s it was taken up by various political systems, including repressive dictatorships.  doesnt the surprising adaptability of the visual language presuppose some uncomfortable similarities between the modernists and the governments their styles but tressed? in the weissenhof housing exhibition room, for instance, theres an illuminating willi baumeister lithograph.  the image shows a stiflingly rococo living room on an onyx background with a bright red x scrawled across it, as if the gesture could erase the hated heritage pictured.  accompanying this image is the provocative phrase wie wohnen? (how to live?) the violent, unthinking negation implied by the poster is eerily reminiscent of fascist attitudes.  despite this sole criticism, designing a new world is a fantastic show.  intellectual yet approach able, slick without being arrogant, and filled with the exuberant joy all true education should impart.  its a worthy new beginning for a museum wanting to claim its place among the big names in the art world.  with modernism, that claim already has plenty to back it up.

more than 30 washington area museums, galleries, arts organizations and businesses are participating in colorfield remix, the largest celebration of painting ever held in the washington area and the first true look at the painters who made the washington color school a ubiquitous presence in this city.  this long overdue event honors the washington color school artists, as well as the color field visual art movement.  i say long overdue because washington has, at times, been ambivalent about the shadow that the color schools presence has cast over the local art scene throughout the years.  for some artists, the washington color school had been considered a movement to be actively disassociated with subsequently for a period of time its accomplishments were all but forgotten.  indeed, only gene davis and morris louis have enjoyed anything akin to a retrospective look at the works that put washington on the art world map.  this years hirshhorn show of morris paintings is part of a traveling exhibition that will be the first consideration of his works since 1986.  colorfield remix was conceived by the kreeger museum, whose director judy a.  greenberg states that the number of organizations participating in this celebration is evidence of how profoundly the color field movement permeated the consciousness of washingtons cultural life in its time, and how it continues to sustain and inspire artists today.  true enough, but there have been periods, and various curators, who could not have had less respect or more disdain for the progenitors of washingtons only interna tional color field art movement.  it is refreshing that the current climate sees the validity in their works the influence of the color school painters in washington cannot be overstated when considering the generation of artists who attended the corcoran school of art during the 1970s to mideighties.  during that time, gene davis was considered by many to be something of a shaman or a guru, one who would hold court in his classroom several times a week to a rapt group of aspiring artists and sunday painters.  he, with his shaved head, had a presence larger than that of any washington artist i have ever known since.  still, davis could be very acerbic, and sometimes petty if you were not a member of his club.  those were different times indeed.

this exhibit of the late artist leon berkowitz, curated by the washington arts museum, serves as a fitting introduction to the work of an important washington artist to those who may not have known him, as well as a reminder of his career to those who did.  in 1945 berkowitz was cofounder of the washing ton workshop center, which brought together morris louis, howard mehring, and others who became the vanguard of a movement soon to be known as the washington color school.  while these artists went on to fame and shows in prestigious new york galleries in the fifties and sixties, berkowitz left wash ington to live and work abroad.  while his work was not strictly a part of the color school, one cannot look at this exhibit of paintings from 1953 to 1978 and not be struck by the artists overwhelming concern for color.  upon his return to washington in the sixties, berkowitz began to explore what he called, color as light.  in galilee, a work from 1965, bold horizontal stripes of green, magenta, and reds begin to bleed into each other.  by 1969, in harp string, we see the hard edged stripe, used sparingly, become a focal point.  reviewing this period, one can discern the influences of gene davis, barnett newman, and mark rothko, but eventually berkowitz developed a signature style which, while evoking these other artists, was distinctively his own.  by the time he painted dualities in 1971, no traces of the stripes remained.  a glowing center draws the viewer into the picture, and the contrasting colors at the edges of the painting act almost as a sort of foreground.  it is in the series seven lights, from 1975, that berkowitz best conveys his mystical side.  five large paintings placed side by side show a progression evolving, with subtle changes like that of a sunrise or sunset growing and fading.  the paintings themselves seem to generate light.  berkowtiz exhibited frequently during his lifetime at the corcoran, the phillips collection, and top commercial galleries in dc.  it is wonderful to have a chance to see his works again, after such a long absence from the district art scene.  his return is part of a citywide salute to the washington color school.  this exhibit continues until june 29.

shimmed tightly between the midcity fish market and carls barber shop on p street, its no wonder that the transformer gallery is aching for nature.  spring has been fetchingly calling and the four artists showcased in transformers natural (dis)order, seor tangcito, jessica cebra, christine buckton tillman, and chad yencer, have something to say in response.  who rules the roost, the everformidable man or his persistent and predictable foe, nature? in this case, it depends on whom you ask.  the crme de la crme of natural (dis)order is seor tangcitos sweet installation.  the assemblage, a series of panels and constructed elements, is offset by an ab stracted mountain range painted on the gallery wall.  the painstakingly crafted backdropa feat in itself perfectly cradles seor tangcitos mixed media panels and the accompanying sculpturettes.  the dioramalike installation narrates the artists impressions of the south american culture he encountered while traveling in peru, bolivia, chile, and argentina, and it tells the story well.  the tale is one that few have the opportunity to experience: living from the land, the cycle of mutual sustenance and vitality...  until modernization and greed rear their ugly headsin this case, exemplified by a car rambling down the mountainside bearing the words tratado de encontrate (treaty of encontrate) with a cheerful puff of tarcolored exhaust lying in its wake.  both jessica cebra and christine buckton till man tap into the relative abandon and recklessness with which our society wields its power: power to consume, to produce and waste, to manipulate and destroy resources which will never be fully understood or regained.  cebras series on view, the gilded geo, further embodies the clash between the natural and unnatural in restrained collage works of 2d and 3d varieties.  the overall tone, while conveying an appreciation for the complexity of natures biological origins, is woeful and chaotic.  buck ton tillmans diminutive ceramics, made from slipcasting objects both natural and man made, are at the same time dreamy and strange.  like snow whites poisoned apple, cebra and buckton tillman speak in the native language of seductive and precious packages while lacing their work with bittersweet messages of admonishment.  in an unexpected tryst of the natural and not, chad yencer uses the greatest gift of human advancement, google, to access the nature that cannot be found outside his door.  in the spirit animals series yencer depicts those close to him as animals, but bases their representation on images found through googles search engine.  although well aware of the irony in his choices using technology to access the natural world and associating idealized animal qualities with individual people y encers intent is to represent the animals without stylization, so the their character (and the character of their human counterparts) can be viewed clearly and without distraction.  unexpectedly, he succeeds.  a definitive personal ity is evident in each of the animals.  despite audubon and the numerous other documentary artists that have saturated our animal loving sensibilities (albeit with slightly different objectives), these nine paintings are truly enjoyable to view. yencer, quite skilled in his trade, endows each creature with engaging and soulful eyes, so that you want to befriend the fourlegged creatures and show them the natural and homey environment of your living room wall.  the subject matter is by no means fresh, but natural (dis)order is a wellbalanced take on one of the oldest wars in history, that of man versus nature.  using a multitude of media, seor tangcito, jessica cebra, christine buckton tillman, and chad yencer have produced intellectually based, high quality works that merit a trip indoors even on the most tempting of spring days.  the gallery is open to the public wednesday through saturday from 17 pm and is located at 1401 p street, nw.

ezr: you describe yourself as a literary activist.  how did you get that job title?

eem: well.  i didnt get that job title where i saw it advertised in the paper and i applied for it.  its pretty much the way i like to describe myself when im introduced to audiences.  its a definition i feel comfortable with.  by literary activist, i am defined the following three ways.  one is, i put emphasis on the fact that i write.  im also con cerned about the promotion of writers and the promotion of literacy in our community.  third, im concerned about the preservation of literary history, so im very much concerned about what happens to writers papers.  im concerned about writers having wills.  im concerned about a literary history having a certain material presence in a city, where you can walk down a street and you can know that a particular writer lives in a particular house because theres a plaque there, or you see a writer whose face is in a mural.  i want to make sure that thats preserved.  so those are the ways i define being a literary activist those three categories; writing, promotion and preservation.  in terms of poetry, which is my love, poetry, promotion of others, and then preservation, so those are the three things.  i say that because i know so many individuals who are poets or fiction writers whom i respect, but when i look at how their life is structured and my own life, i see a considerable difference.  i dont spend a whole lot of time writing.  i dont have a little cottage in the south of france, or go off on retreats.  if i look at my time, a lot of my time is spent dealing with political events or running programs or reading manuscripts.  i wish i had time to sit down and write poems.  i wish i had more time to send out poems to different magazines, but this is the life that ive selected and i feel very happy with it.

ezr: in the last couple years, even though youve published more poems than a lot of people who consider themselves poets, youve focused a lot on the blog you keep at www.eethelbertmiller.com?

eem: i think i blog now as a something i enjoy doing.  i didnt set out to be a blogger.  i think in a small way its one way that ive adjusted to a change in technology.  we know that newspapers are changing.  magazines are changing.  the way that we access information is changing, so one would assume that every type of writer novelist, journalist, poet their life is going to be impacted.  i can see looking back since 2004 that when i look at what ive written, i say, wow, ive written a lot of things on my blog, those are just blog entries, but i look at what i had difficulty doing before blogging.  i was never a writer who kept a diary.  i was always one of those writers who someone gave a nice diary at the beginning of the year as a gift, but i never used it past january sixth.  when i look at the fact that ive been blogging since 2004, almost on a daily basis, one of the things that the blog has done is something that someone might promote in a workshop.  they might say, eli, it would be a good thing for you to write every day, and not write for publication, but just learn the disci pline of writing every day, and you know that you could sit in a workshop and say yeah, ill do that.  then as a couple weeks go by you and look up, you missed a day here.  you missed a day there.  then a month might go by, but i feel somewhat amazed by the fact that as i look up over the last year, im blogging every day.  ive started to take a lot more risks with my blog.  im more outspoken.  i try to build on my knowledge of successful blogs.  many blogs deal with simply politics and then some of them are very very personal.  i think ive found a nice middle road, and developed a style, which is what brings people back.  people say they come back for the actual writing, which i think contains a certain humor.  i think ive written my blog in somewhat the same way that i wrote my memoir.  ive been concerned about how it would be accessed as a literary style.  i wanted something that people of all ages could connect with, and i think thats whats happening now, so im happy with that.  it makes it difficult for me to sit down and write the second memoir, though.  i had outlined a second memoir before i started blogging and now one says okay, what are you putting in a blog that you would put in a memoir? what would you have put in a blog that you wouldnt put in a memoir? all of a sudden, because ive gotten a foot into this particular genre, i have to see how ill adjust.  will i incorporate parts of the blog into the new memoir? i havent decided that yet?

ezr: whats your first memoir about?

eem: the first memoir is fathering words.  that came out in 2000.  that was a big success.  in 2003 it was selected by the dc we read program for the one city one read program where you have various people around the city reading one book.  that was a big plug for it, so now when i look at the success of it it is a book that has been incorporated around the country in different classrooms i feel ive written a book whose audience has increased as the years have passed, and i think that as a writer thats what youre happy about.  it might be difficult to set out to write that type of book.  you know, when you look at the number of books that are published a year, they have a very short shelf spacetime, and thats it.  many authors who are very prolific many times dont even read their early work or go back to their early work.  its like musicians.  you know, it was very difficult to get miles davis to perform something that he was doing in the fifties, because art ists like to move ahead.  at the same time, when you create a work which begins to stand up and another generation of writers make reference to it, or youre reading an article and all of a sudden theres a literary reference to the book, then you realize youve done a good job.  you always hope that literature is timeless, that somebody could pick up a memoir that ive written in another country or in another time, and it resonates.  when i look at my other books of poetry, that has not been the case.  i cannot point to a book of poetry that is selling better than when it first came out.

ezr: youve tried to pick up on several different poets earlier work by putting together anthologies...

eem: yeah, i think that putting together anthologies which i dont think ill do now because unless you have a real staff, i wouldnt undertake it.  when i did beyond the frontier, that was the last anthology i did.  i said i would never do that again because i was doing that book when technology was changing rapidly, and that was back in the day when someone would send you something and you couldnt open it, and nothing was compatible.  then, because the project took longer than expected, when you take a body of young writers most of their addresses are going to change.  people are constantly moving.  they dont all leave forwarding addresses.  then, some writers, when they hear from you that you want to use a particular poem, they want to select the poem for you.  no, dont publish that poem.  use this one! then, because the process took so long, by the time im ready to go to print, oh, ive changed that poem.  heres a new version.  or you have a person who changes their name, and all of a sudden now you have to abbreviate their middle initial, learn the capitalization, and these are the things where if you have a staff to make some of the editorial changes, thats wonderful, but its a lot.  when i got through beyond the frontier, i said i will never do that again, and it has to be a labor of love.  i would like more anthologies like beyond the frontier that arent purchased for commercial reasons but that are historical documents, so youd have these big anthologies that would say, here are the people who are reading in the dc and maryland area from 2000 to 2010.  you could go to the library and check the shelves, and find those documents, but i would only take on that work if i had the department behind me or an organization or a group of five or six people working on it.

ezr sounds like the right way to do it.  youve also put together a very successful series of poetry readings.  is that something you might do again?

eem: well i used to do that.  at one time i ran the ascension series.  i started that in 1974, and i started that primarily for africanamerican writers living in dc.  many of us at that time i was 24 at that time we wanted to be published.  we wanted to have that book, and there was nobody running companies in the area and so we were frustrated, and i stumbled on the fact that in between the book and the audience was a poetry reading.  you might not have a book but by doing a certain number of readings you could develop a market for a book.  think about the last time that you went into a bookstore, went directly to the poetry section and purchased a book of poetry by somebody youve never heard of.  when you go in there, you know what youve heard.  if theres a new writer whos been reading around the city, you say, oh, this is soandsos book.  i wonder if that poem that i like is in here.  thats how that works.  if i went back to the publishing business, and i was selecting manuscripts, i would definitely take writers who were active.  you know, if you, eli, were not active in the area, if youre just writing, living in virginia, no...  you would have to be writing, doing readings at different places and venues so that i know that you have an audience and i know that as soon as i put that book out there its gonna move.  if not, im gonna have to do a hell of a job as a promoter or publisher to take a person, like, sitting at the next table who has great poems but nobody knows them.  the poetry reading, i felt, was key in terms of audience development.  i felt the poetry reading was key in terms of helping a young person develop that courage and self knowledge to step in front of an audience.  if, for example, i invited you to read poetry next week, you know in responding to that invitation, that youre gonna have to sit at home and choose which poems to read, so that invitation is an opportunity to do some selfediting.  youve got to look at your work and say, okay, i like this.  i dont like this.  ill read this and see what response its gonna create, but all of a sudden its not just a reading.  you are in a process of looking at your work critically.  the other reason for doing a reading is the other spin off.  you come, you read and people interact with you, you get to network, and all of a sudden you are establishing your audience.  you are interacting.  you meet more people at a reading than if you have a book published, sitting at a shelf on a library, so the other side of a reading is the network it becomes.  if you were a new writer, what my reading series was doing back in the seventies it was immediately giving you a community.  people came, heard your work, said oh, i have a similar poem, and there was a spinoff where you look up, people began hanging out together.  once i saw that, i built on it.  i realized that while i was giving young writers their first reading, when i looked around at the literary scene of washington, the reading scene was very segregated.  nowhere could you point and say theres a series of wellknown africanamerican writers reading in washington, dc, so i began with my own money and my own resources, bringing well known writers ishmael reed, alice walker, june jordanto dc.  that was their only invitation to dc.  if you were reading some of these writers as an africanamerican or white reader and never thinking you were going to see them, well, at that time they were not going to be invited by the folger.  they were not going to be invited by anybody.  if i didnt write the invitation, they didnt come.
